Tutorial smart contract guest book (#838)
near/docs: docs/tutorials/contracts/guest-book.md

---
id: guest-book
title: Build a Guest Book
sidebar_label: Build a Guest Book
---

In this section we will create a starter app built with an [AssemblyScript] backend and a [React] frontend that allows users to sign in with [NEAR] and add a message to the guest book.

## Intro notes 

We will be referencing branches of a NEAR project called `guest-book`. 

Each step will be it's own branch, so you can follow along or jump ahead to see the complete code.

You need `near-cli` installed globally. Here's how:

    npm install --global near-cli

This will give you the `near` [CLI] tool. Ensure that it's installed with:

    near --version

> Next, clone the repo [here]. We will start with the `boilerplate` branch, and slowly progress towards the master branch with the completed code. 

Reviewer: need a link to the repo

Author: Fixed (links at the bottom)

Alternatively, create a basic NEAR React project with package [create-near-app] using the command:

>     yarn create near-app path/to/my-near-react-app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    npx create-near-app YOUR_AWESOME_APP --frontend=react
```

> Just adjust the folder structure to match the branch we will be referencing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Local Setup

To run this project locally:

1. Prerequisites: Make sure you have [Node.js](https://nodejs.org) ≥ 12 installed, then use it to install [yarn]: `npm install --global yarn` (or just `npm i -g yarn`)
2. Install dependencies: `yarn install` (or just `yarn`)
3. Run the local development server: `yarn dev` (see `package.json` for a
   full list of `scripts` you can run with `yarn`)

> Now you'll have a local development environment backed by the NEAR _TestNet_. Running `yarn dev` will tell you the URL you can visit in your browser to see the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you'll have a local development environment connected to NEAR's _testnet_ network. Running `yarn dev` will tell you the URL you can visit in your browser to see the app.
```

### Exploring The Code

1. The backend code (smart contract) lives in the `/assembly` folder. This code deploys to
   the NEAR blockchain when you run `yarn deploy:contract`  – [learn more

>    about NEAR smart contracts][smart contract docs].

Reviewer: need url

Author: Fixed

2. The frontend code lives in the `/src` folder. A great place to start exploring UI code 
   is in `/src/index.js`, where you can see how the frontend connects to the NEAR blockchain.
3. Tests: there are different kinds of tests for the frontend and backend. The
   backend code gets tested with the [asp] command for running the backend
   AssemblyScript tests, and [jest] for running frontend tests. You can run
   both of these at once with `yarn test`.

Both contract and client-side code will auto-reload as you update source files.

## Contract

If we imagine the blockchain to be a sort of database, then smart contracts function like an ORM or API with read/write access to the blockchain. 

> The methods that do _NOT_ update the state of your application are called _view_ methods. Those that do are called _call_ or _change_ methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The methods that do _NOT_ update the state of your application are called _view_ methods. Those that do modify state are called _change_ methods.
```
You can actually just view state with a contract call. Why someone would actually do that is beyond me lol

## Contract: Develop 

> For this section we will be working in the `assembly/` folder of your project, and all code is written in TypeScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this section we will be working in the `assembly/` folder of your project, and all code is written in AssemblyScript.
```

Its important that we make sure we distinguish TS from AS as they may seem similar they are very different.

    expect(messages.length).toBe(
      1,
      'should only contain one message'
    );
    expect(messages[0]).toStrictEqual(
      message,
      'message should be "hello world"'
    );
  });
  [...]
```

The "message tests" simply invokes the `addMessage` function, and checks that `messages` contains the appropriate data in the correct order.

```ts 
  afterEach(() => {
    while(messages.length > 0) {
      messages.pop();
    }
  });
```

Our use of `afterEach` deletes the message we add in each subsequent test.

The second testing block, `attached deposit tests`, makes heavy use of `VMContext` to allow us to check that any attached deposits to a message get successfully added to our account.  

### Running Your Tests

In your testing terminal type:

```
  yarn test
```

Once finished, you should see passing tests that look like the following:

![Guest Book Contract Unit Test](/docs/assets/guest-book_as_unit-test.jpg)

Well done! We created a smart contract and tested it. 

Write a few more simple tests of your own, and see if we missed any edge cases.

Otherwise, let's deploy our smart contract and interact with it from the terminal.

## Contract: Deploy

> We deploy our smart contract to NEAR _TestNet_, with either an auto-generated account id (dev deploy) or a permanent one we've already set up. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We deploy our smart contract to NEAR's `testnet` network, with either an auto-generated account id ([dev-deploy](https://docs.near.org/docs/tools/near-cli#near-dev-deploy)) or an existing account id you already created.
```

### Dev Deploy

> Every smart contract in NEAR has its [own associated account][NEAR accounts].

Reviewer: add url :)

Author: Fixed

```
  yarn dev
```

> The above deploys your smart contract to NEAR _TestNet_ with a throwaway account. It also starts a dev server, which we will need when we work on our front end. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above deploys your smart contract to `testnet` with a [dev-account](https://docs.near.org/docs/concepts/account#dev-accounts). It also starts a local server, which we will need when we work on our front end. 
```

If you want to start interacting with your contracts without starting a local server, you can simply run:

```
  near dev-deploy
```

It does pretty much the same thing as `yarn dev`, but without the dev server.  So it will generate an account for your contract, `dev-some-autogenerated-account`.

> If you have already configured permanent account for your contract, you can deploy it with the following command: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have already created an account for your contract, you can deploy it with the following command: 
```

### Prod Deploy 

``` 
  near deploy \

>   --contractName=permanent-contract-accountid-you-set-up.testnet \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  --contractName=YOUR_ACCOUNT_ID.testnet \
```

>   --keyPath=./path-to/testnet/permanent-contract-accountid-you-set-up.testnet.json \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  --keyPath=./path-to/testnet/YOUR_ACCOUNT_ID.testnet.json \
```

  --wasmFile=./out/main.wasm
```

### Invoking Contract Methods

The following command calls our main change method, `addMessage`.

```

>  near call dev-some-autogenerated-account addMessage '{"text": "hello guestbook"}' --accountId someValidNEARAccount.testnet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 near call YOUR_ACCOUNT_ID.testnet addMessage '{"text": "hello guestbook"}' --accountId AN_ACCOUNT_YOU_OWN.testnet
```

let's also add a note here about how for the `--accountId` flag the `AN_ACCOUNT_YOU_OWN.testnet` needs to have credentials stored locally using `near login`

Author: Fixed in a030ab61703335d8aa795892ca6dd80473a0a40b

```

then run:

```

>  near call dev-some-autogenerated-account getMessages --accountId someValidNEARAccount.testnet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 near call YOUR_ACCOUNT_ID.testnet getMessages --accountId AN_ACCOUNT_YOU_OWN.testnet
```

```

Your terminal output should resemble this:

```
[
  {
    premium: false,

>     sender: 'someValidNEARAccount.testnet',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    sender: 'AN_ACCOUNT_YOU_OWN.testnet',
```

    text: 'hello guestbook'
  }
]
```

Fantastic! Our backend is ready to send and receive. Let's build our UI!

### Switching to a permanent account

> When you're ready to switch over from a dev account to a permanent one, here's how:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you're ready to switch over from a dev account to a custom one, here's how:
```

##### Step 1: Create an account for the contract

> Visit [NEAR Wallet] and make a new account. You'll be deploying these smart contracts to this new account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visit [NEAR Wallet](https://wallet.testnet.near.org/) and make a new account. You'll be deploying these smart contracts to this new account.
```

> Now authorize NEAR CLI for this new account, and follow the instructions it gives you:

Reviewer: Explain what `near login` does

Author: Fixed in a030ab61703335d8aa795892ca6dd80473a0a40b

    const CONTRACT_NAME = process.env.CONTRACT_NAME || 'your-account-here!'

##### Step 3: change remote URL if you cloned this repo 

Unless you forked this repository you will need to change the remote URL to a repo that you have commit access to. This will allow auto deployment to Github Pages from the command line.

1) go to GitHub and create a new repository for this project
2) open your terminal and in the root of this project enter the following:

```sh
git remote set-url origin https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME/YOUR_REPOSITORY.git
```

##### Step 4: deploy!
One command: `yarn deploy`.

As you can see in `package.json`, this does two things:
1. builds & deploys smart contracts to NEAR TestNet
2. builds & deploys frontend code to GitHub using [gh-pages]. This will only work if the project already has a repository set up on GitHub. Feel free to modify the `deploy` script in `package.json` to deploy elsewhere.

## Front-End

In this section we will not only build (and test) a way for the user to interact with our contract in the browser, we will also allow them to go premium using their NEAR wallet. 

## Front-End: Develop

> Before we begin, if you are new to [React], you may want to spend some time reviewing the docs before proceeding. This tutorial focuses on ramping up your smart contract skills, so we won't be spending too much time on the intricacies of MVC, etc. Also, if you are not familiar with _functional (stateless) components_ and _hooks_, definitely, take some time to get acquainted with them.

Reviewer: add react url

Author: Fixed

};

export default App;
```

So, a couple of things to point out:

```js
const SUGGESTED_DONATION = '0';
const BOATLOAD_OF_GAS = Big(3).times(10 ** 13).toFixed();
```

We set some constants. The first being a default donation amount,`SUGGESTED_DONATION`. The user has the option to attach a deposit to their message. It will look like this in the browser:

![Guest Book UI Donation Field](/docs/assets/guest-book_fe_form_donation.jpg)

We also set our max allowed prepaid gas at 30000000000000.

Even with minimal understanding of React, it's not hard to guess what the bulk of the code is doing here. 

`App.js` mainly serves as a conduit between our backend (smart contracts), and our front end (what the user sees and interacts with), handling the events and "controlling" how data is passed to and from our smart contracts. Some of the main features wired to our controller are:

* User can log in/out.
* User can submit a message.
* Messages are retrieved once a user has logged in.
* User can add a donation with their message.

That's it! Go ahead and run `yarn dev` in the terminal. You should see something like this:

![Guest Book Logged In](/docs/assets/guest-book_fe_logged-in.jpg)

> Try logging out then back in again. NEAR explorer will check for your wallet credentials stored locally in the browser, and will ask you to authorize this app. You can try some of the other features our app offers, and it will all happen in our dev environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try logging out then back in again. NEAR Wallet will check for your wallet credentials stored locally in the browser, and will ask you to authorize this app.
```

### Exploring The Code

1. The backend code (smart contract) lives in the `/assembly` folder. This code deploys to
   the NEAR blockchain when you run `yarn deploy:contract`  – [learn more
   about NEAR smart contracts][smart contract docs].
2. The frontend code lives in the `/src` folder. A great place to start exploring UI code 
   is in `/src/index.js`, where you can see how the frontend connects to the NEAR blockchain.
3. Tests: there are different kinds of tests for the frontend and backend. The
   backend code gets tested with the [asp] command for running the backend
   AssemblyScript tests, and [jest] for running frontend tests. You can run
   both of these at once with `yarn test`.

Both contract and client-side code will auto-reload as you update source files.

## Contract

If we imagine the blockchain to be a sort of database, then smart contracts function like an ORM or API with read/write access to the blockchain. 

The methods that do _NOT_ update the state of your application are called _view_ methods. Those that do modify state are called _change_ methods.

## Contract: Develop 

> We can start by checking out the `boilerplate` branch and navigating to the `assembly/` folder of the project where all our AssemblyScript code is written. If you want the completed code for this section only, see the `contract-test` branch. If you want the fully completed code, checkout the `main` branch.   

Author: ```suggestion
We can start by checking out the `boilerplate` branch and navigating to the project's `assembly/` folder where all our AssemblyScript code is written. If you want the completed code for this section only, see the `contract-test` branch. If you want the fully completed code, checkout the `main` branch.   
```

Let's look at our first testing block: 

```ts
describe('message tests', () => {
  afterEach(() => {
    while(messages.length > 0) {
      messages.pop();
    }
  });
  it('adds a message', () => {
    addMessage('hello world');
    expect(messages.length).toBe(
      1,
      'should only contain one message'
    );
    expect(messages[0]).toStrictEqual(
      message,
      'message should be "hello world"'
    );
  });
  [...]
```

The "message tests" simply invokes the `addMessage` function, and checks that `messages` contains the appropriate data in the correct order.

```ts 
  afterEach(() => {
    while(messages.length > 0) {
      messages.pop();
    }
  });
```

Our use of `afterEach` deletes the message we add in each subsequent test.

The second testing block, `attached deposit tests`, makes heavy use of `VMContext` to allow us to check that any attached deposits to a message get successfully added to our account.  

### Running Your Tests

In your testing terminal type:

```
  yarn test
```

Once finished, you should see passing tests that look like the following:

![Guest Book Contract Unit Test](/docs/assets/guest-book_as_unit-test.jpg)

> > If you get an error, make sure you have node version 14.16 installed.

Author: ```suggestion
> **Note:** if you get an error, make sure you have Node.js version 14.16 installed.
```
